MuleSoft Telugu Course — Day 12 (cleaned transcript)
Source: transcripts/day12.txt (Whisper medium, Telugu → English). Cleaned by Claude: misheard technical terms corrected from context and from the class screens (slides/day12 in the notes repo), repetition loops removed, punctuation and paragraphs added. Nothing added that was not said. [unclear] marks parts that could not be recovered; [screen: …] marks text read from the video.

---

In the previous session we took the response from the weather API and sent it back from our API. But that isn't the requirement. The requirement: transform it as needed, then send the response to our consumer. How? Obviously, we put a Transform Message, write the transformations in it, and send it.

What else could we use? Set Payload — since this isn't complex, it's simple, we could use Set Payload. But I'll go with Transform Message, and I'll show you why. In Set Payload you can only set one payload: you set a value and write the transformation in fx mode. In Transform Message we also write the payload expression — all the JSON fields. But Transform Message has more capability. Look: "Add new target". In one Transform Message you can create attributes, create variables and create the payload. I could create two variables here instead of two Set Variables.

[screen: Transform Message → Selection dialog, choosing the target — Payload, Variable, Attributes.]

But what if the second variable depends on the first? Then this is wrong — we shouldn't do it. Two independent variables in one Transform Message are fine. If the second variable depends on the first, create the first in one Set Variable and then the second in another Set Variable after it. If there's no dependency between them, one Transform Message is fine. So it's more powerful than Set Payload or Set Variable: you can set the payload, create attributes, or give a variable name and create a variable. I'll show everything; for now, understand it has more capability. Just a second.

Now, after the request we need Set Payload, Transform Message or something to transform and send the response. I'll use Transform Message. How should the response look? We already fixed our API's request and response.

[drawing: request {"city": "Mumbai"} → response {"city": "Mumbai", "minTemp": 35, "maxTemp": 45, "tempUnit": "celcius"}; URL http://host:port/basepath/path.]

If I want this response structure, I can paste the same structure here and map it. The response from the weather API is huge; I map from it. City, minimum temperature, maximum temperature — they're already in the response. Map them correctly and it's proper.

What should the output type be? JSON — not Java. Our API's request comes in JSON and our response should go in JSON. So at the end the Transform Message must produce the payload in JSON; then the Listener takes it and sends it in the body. After pasting and formatting [right-click → format], it looks like an error — but it isn't; it's an issue with the pasted double quotes.

Our response structure is this. Where does the city name come from? From the input request. Does it also come in the weather response? Yes — look, I hit the OpenWeather endpoint directly [sending q] — you can see the city name. [Someone, please mute.] But what if the response didn't contain the city name? Take it from the request. Since payload.city is small, I store it: before the request, a Set Variable [screen: name "request", value payload]. Then how do I map the city in Transform Message? vars.request.city. In the request variable there's the JSON payload.

Where's the minimum temperature? There's an option called the DataWeave Playground for working out this mapping — an online playground MuleSoft provides to learn and try DataWeave transformations. Search "DataWeave Playground". I paste our payload into the payload section, write an expression, and see what I get. "payload" gives the whole payload. The temperature is in main: payload.main, then .temp, .temp_min, .temp_max [screen: Hyderabad temp_min 288.38, temp_max 289.88]. I take that and map it here. We've documented our API's request and response, so it's very clear what to send.

How much is the temperature? Around 300 — have you ever heard of that in Celsius? Normally our temperature is about 22. So it's in a different unit. Since this is a free API, the unit isn't given clearly — but generally it should be. The unit is Kelvin. To convert Kelvin to Celsius there's a formula — I don't know it right now, so what do I do? Google: "Kelvin to Celsius" [screen: 300 K = 26.85 °C]. Or the provider gives it in the documentation.

So we convert: minus 273.15. For 300 it becomes 26.85. If I write minus 273.15 directly, does it work? I check in the Playground — it works. The system takes care of the type automatically.

What if it doesn't? Then convert it as a number. Say the value is a string. How do we identify that it's a string? There's a function typeOf — capital O. Put the value inside typeOf and it tells you the data type. Then convert it: "as Number". Now it's a number. If it's a string, "string minus number" fails. Here DataWeave already treats it as a number and auto-converts [screen: "110" − 24 → 86, with a warning "Auto-Coercing type from "110" to Number"]. But not all programming languages do that. So to convert a string, use "as Number" — it becomes a number and the subtraction works. Very easy.

[screen: Transform Message — "minTemp": payload.main.temp_min − 273.15, "maxTemp": payload.main.temp_max − 273.15.]

You know how to add a breakpoint — right-click → Add breakpoint; remove it the same way. It stops the request at that point. The request came. What's in the Mule event? In the payload, the city is Mumbai. Look — the variable has been created: the request variable. Then after the Request, the payload is overwritten. What to notice: whenever things are overwritten and we need them later, we save them in variables. I need the city name, so I access vars.request.city and map it. Is it clear for everyone? Yes.

What happened after the HTTP Request? Was the payload overwritten? Yes. The attributes? Yes. The variables? No. [The question was repeated many times in the raw transcript.] Look at this — this is the propagation of payload, attributes and variables. What is propagation — how does it work? This is very important. If you don't know it and haven't saved the value in a variable, how does the city get accessed? It doesn't. So whenever there's a connector, see how propagation works: the payload is overwritten, the attributes are overwritten, the variables are not. If you want the same attributes or payload after this, save them first. Why is the variable still there? It's not overwritten; it stays. If I add another Set Variable with the same name and change the value, it changes — otherwise it doesn't.

Next: in the Transform Message's payload section, I overwrote the payload with the new response. Now I have a response.

[Agenda slide: Demonstration of consume REST service in APS · Propagation of payload, attributes and variables across HTTP Request · Target Variable, Response Timeout, Response Validator and Reconnection Strategy · Q&A session.]

Now we'll discuss these concepts — not three, four: target variable, response timeout, response validator and reconnection strategy.

First, the target variable. What did I tell you? To keep something that isn't the payload, save it in a variable. One option: a Set Variable or Transform Message with a variable name, mapping the payload into it. Another option: click the Request connector → Advanced → Target Variable. If I give a name here, the response is saved in that variable — not in the payload. I give a variable called weatherResponse; the response will be in it.

Will our mapping still work? No. Why? The response isn't in the payload any more; it's in the variable. Will it break? Let's check. Deployed — automatically built. Hit the request. Now look at the payload: it's the request payload. So the payload is not being overwritten. That's the first observation. Second: the attributes are also not overwritten — they're the original ones: the headers (default headers), query params null, URI params null, method and some parameters — exactly what we got initially. Attributes not overwritten, payload not overwritten. And since I gave a target variable — that's a variable too — there was one variable before and now there are two. Is it clear?

Now, as expected, the mapping breaks. Why? It looks for main.temp_min in the payload — it's null. null − 273.15? Not possible. That's why we get this error: "You called the function '-' with these arguments: Null, Number (273.15)" [screen: MULE:EXPRESSION; Postman 500 Server Error]. Why null? Because there's no main in the payload.

Change the transformation: read from the variable — vars.weatherResponse.main.temp_min and .temp_max [screen: "city": vars.request.city, "minTemp": vars.weatherResponse.main.temp_min − 273.15, "maxTemp": vars.weatherResponse.main.temp_max − 273.15, "tempUnit": "celcius"]. Save. It builds automatically — why? Because "Build Automatically" is enabled for the project, so even small changes rebuild and redeploy. Redeployed. Hit Next again. The payload until now was the request city; now I overwrite the payload with the response. No error [screen: Postman 200 OK — {"city": "Mumbai", "minTemp": 22.94, "maxTemp": 24.99, "tempUnit": "celcius"}].

But someone reading this sees vars.weatherResponse — where did it come from? There's no Set Variable for it, no variable in the Transform Message. If you think the mapping is wrong, check the connectors: in the Request's Advanced section another variable is created — the target variable. The response from a connector is stored there; it exists for Database and other connectors too. From the database, the database response; from the Salesforce connector, the Salesforce response; since this is the Request connector, the third-party API's response is saved here, and we map it. Is this clear for everyone?

Most of the time we take the entire response. On the Request, in Advanced, we define where the response goes — by default it's not set (it goes to the payload). I set it, so the response is saved in a variable. That's the target variable — "target" because the connector's response is saved there. Say there's weatherResponse here, a Set Variable there, and a variable "test" that's a dummy — if you don't know where a target variable came from, you'll have no idea. So it's very, very important. Target variables in connectors behave like normal variables; the only thing is they hold the connector's response.

Next, response timeout. Say I send a request to this API and it gives a response after 10 minutes. Then what? Say you add a mobile phone to a cart and it keeps spinning, because the API in the background doesn't respond for 10 minutes. Place the order today and it spins until tomorrow. The response should be very, very fast — otherwise thousands of crores of business loss and a bad user experience. Some systems take a few seconds; some bulk processing of thousands or lakhs of records runs in the background for minutes — that's acceptable, it's different. But most of the time we develop APIs to give responses to front ends or other applications.

So our front-end application sends a request and this API doesn't respond for 10 minutes — it keeps spinning. It's better to say "it isn't working right now, please try after some time" than wait 10 minutes. For that there's a parameter called response timeout, and we should define it. What is it? How long should I wait? We haven't configured it anywhere, so by default it's 10,000 milliseconds. If the response takes longer than 10 seconds — say 11 — it automatically raises an HTTP:TIMEOUT error. Did you understand? Yes.

What if I want to increase it? Where do I configure it? In the connector configuration, among other places. Let me tell you a recent situation. We deployed 8 applications to production early in the morning, and my whole team was monitoring support. One specific case: we consume a third-party API that takes 120 seconds for us. By default, the timeout would hit at 10 seconds. All requests took 90, 100, 110 seconds. The business accepts that — no problem — because it happens in the background; there's no front-end impact. Since the target responds like that, we wait and process. With the default 10-second timeout, every request would time out, even though the system processes it in the background. To overcome that, I configure the response timeout.

Look: on the Request → Response section there's Response timeout. It's empty — what does empty mean? The default: 10,000 milliseconds, which is 10 seconds. If I want something else, it must be in milliseconds. For example, I set it to 5,000: if it takes more than 5 seconds, it errors out [screen: Response timeout 5000, Response validator None].

I'm depending on a third-party API, so I can't demonstrate the timeout properly — it responds within milliseconds. How can we test it? Deploy an API that we make slow on purpose — say it waits 10 seconds before responding. Then call it from our API with a 5-second timeout: it responds in 10 seconds, we expect 5, so we get a timeout error. Then set it to 12 seconds and test again. Do you understand? We develop two APIs: we design, develop and deploy one that delays its response; then from the other, with a 5-second timeout, we call it. It expects 5 seconds, it takes 10 — automatically a timeout error, and we send that error response. If the business agrees that it'll take 10 seconds every time, then keep at least 11 or 12 seconds so the requests get through.

So the response timeout is how long a request sent through a connector waits. It's on the Request → Response, and also in the connector configuration: click the configuration → Edit → Settings → Response timeout. So it's at connector level plus operation level.

Why give two? You could ask — did you get the doubt? With both options, which do we configure? There'd be confusion. Here's the reason: I can use the same Request configuration in multiple places — in another flow, other endpoints with the same configuration. Method and path differ, but the host and port are the same. Can I reuse the same Request configuration? Yes. Now say I configure the response timeout at connector level and use it in two operations, one GET in one flow and one POST in another. Does it apply to both, or only GET, or only POST? Both — it's at connector level. But if I want a different value for one method, I set it at that operation, here.

[Discussion of the 120-second case:] Check with trial and error and discuss with the API team whether there's scope to reduce the time. [unclear: "3.5 seconds"]

The test needs two applications: application 1, where I configure the timeout, and application 2, which plays the third party — since the weather API responds in milliseconds, we can't use it. We design, develop and deploy application 2 ourselves. Its response should take, say, 10 seconds. How? A Listener, and before giving the response, a Transform Message using a function called wait — wait 10 seconds — so the response goes out only after 10 seconds. Normally it would respond in half a millisecond, but because of the wait it takes 10 seconds. In application 1 the default is 10,000 milliseconds; say we set 5 seconds. It times out at 5 seconds — and it won't wait for application 2's response at 10 seconds. Since it already timed out, it doesn't wait.

User experience: say a front end → Experience API → Process API → two System APIs. The whole thing should take within 500 milliseconds. If one System API takes 5 seconds every time, even with the timeout set so it doesn't fail, it's still a bad user experience. Say this System API takes more time — about 5 seconds each time, for a window of maybe 10 minutes a day [unclear]. That's why I set 6 seconds here. But the overall response for each request is still around 6 seconds — not good.

But some background operations take a lot of time — document upload, document processing, huge data. These run in non-business hours, and we know the expected time will increase — that's completely fine. Uploading a document into a system can take 5–10 times longer than a normal request, because the data is huge. That's why different data-processing strategies are used for different cases. Any other questions? Okay, fine.

So that's the response timeout. One Request configuration can be used in many places because the host and port are the same; only the method and path differ. It's unnecessary to have a separate configuration for each. If we need the same timeout for both, set it at the connector configuration instead of on both operations. If we want them different, go to the operation level and set the response timeout in the Response section. For example, GET needs 5,000 and POST 10,000: put 5,000 on the GET's response timeout; there's another operation, POST, using the same connector configuration — give it 10,000. If both need 11,000, give 11,000 once in the configuration. Is it clear? Yes. Fine.
