MuleSoft Telugu Course — Day 28 (cleaned transcript)
Source: transcripts/day28.txt (Whisper medium, Telugu → English). Cleaned by Claude: misheard technical terms corrected from context and from the class screens (slides/day28 in the notes repo), repetition loops removed, punctuation and paragraphs added. Nothing added that was not said. Parts of this recording's transcript are fragmentary; they are marked [unclear]. [screen: …] marks text read from the video.

---

In the previous session we prepared everything like a skeleton. Now we improve it, implementation by implementation. Go to POST. Is there anything to start here? Not really. There's one situation: variables — headers, correlation IDs, transaction IDs etc. These are created with a Set Variable or as variables in a Transform Message. The advantage: they can be used anywhere. When we saw the HTTP Request, the attributes got overwritten. Similarly, as standard practice, many companies put a Transform Message or Set Variable at the front and store these values in it.

Where? Some put it here [inside each resource flow], some here [in the main flow before the router]. What's the difference — can you spot it? In each resource flow, we'd do it once for this and once for that. If we do it here, in one place, it's the same variables for all — reusability. When we design, we have to think like this. In each situation there may be some issue — near the URI params; we'll see when we do that. [Why would that issue come? Because URI params exist only after the router matches the resource — unclear in audio.]

[screen: main flow — Listener → Flow Reference (to initialize-variables-sub-flow) → APIkit Router; sub flow "initialize-variables-sub-flow" with "Create Initial Variables".]

What did we do here? With a Flow Reference, we call a sub flow that creates the initial variables — reusable. Along with the 5 variables, what else? The payload is also saved in a variable, to use later.

[screen: Create Initial Variables — variables: queryParams = attributes.queryParams default "", uriParams = attributes.uriParams default "", headers = attributes.headers, startTime = now(), requestPayload = payload.]

Transform Message understood? It can create attributes, variables and the payload; if the variables are independent of each other, we can create many variables in one Transform Message. With Set Variable you create only one.

Is this the only way? Can you suggest another way instead of 5 variables? [Student: write them all as values of one variable.] Right — that's also correct. For example, one variable called originalRequest: create an object in it; first property queryParams mapped to attributes.queryParams; next uriParams; then headers; and so on — each part of the request into one property of one variable. To retrieve a query parameter: vars.originalRequest.queryParams…. There's no right or wrong method; you can follow either.

Another question: suppose, randomly, the query params depend on the URI parameters — to form query-param values I need the URI-param values. Will one Transform Message work? No — there's a dependency. Then put the dependent variable in a separate Set Variable or Transform Message after it: once the URI param is formed, create the next variable. Independent variables can all be created at the same time in one Transform Message. With Set Variable you can create only one. If the architect said "use only Set Variables", how many for 5 independent variables? 5 Set Variables. If you want one instead of 5, use the single-object approach. So there are 3–4 methods. However they do it, you should be capable of understanding and doing it.

Why set all this up at all? Because if we save these as soon as the request comes, anything later that overwrites them doesn't matter — the payload and attributes get overwritten [by connectors]. What if I need them again? Safe side: save them in variables. Variables aren't overwritten unless we overwrite them — deliberately. Which variables? Query params, headers, URI params — or correlation ID, transaction ID. Each organisation decides its set of variables. When you go to another API, clone it from Bitbucket, and you'll understand easily how the main router is placed in the main flow, how the Flow Reference is placed, how multiple Set Variables are used. [Raw transcript loops here.] Many people wonder why this is done in front of the APIkit Router; it should be clarified, along with multiple ways of implementing it. If you have questions, we'll discuss; otherwise I'll proceed.

What did I do: I created the flow here; initial variables are created. Request payload; query params from attributes.queryParams — if empty, default empty string, not null; URI params the same; headers the same. Then startTime. Why did I create a startTime variable? To capture when the request started — say a POST request came; it captures 7:46 with milliseconds, everything. What does now() do? now is a DataWeave function that gives the date and time. In the DataWeave Playground [screen: now() → current date-time] — the date came correctly, but the time shows 2 a.m. — the UTC time zone.

Which server's time does now() take? Generally, wherever the application is deployed. Deployed on my local server, it uses my time zone. Deployed to CloudHub, it uses CloudHub's time zone — UTC by default; change it if you want. Fine. Why use now()? To print the date and time: year, month, day, hours, minutes, seconds, milliseconds.

Why print it? A request started; how long does processing take — milliseconds? I want to log that. In CloudHub [unclear: with a logging tool like New Relic], time usually gets logged per event. How do we know when it started? I wanted to measure time from the Listener. I put the end logger for the post here. The request started here; I print a time here — it crossed here at this time — and you can check how much time it took between the two. Is it mandatory to put this everywhere? No. But there was a situation where something took time — where, why? They said to check properly. Knowing this exists is useful. [unclear — about Postman showing timings and the database component.] This is the start time and this is the end time. I'm just showing that it can be used anywhere; there's no rule. Whenever such a situation comes, you can use it. Any other questions? Okay.

The initial variables are created. The request comes and goes to POST. What do we do in the logging? It would be nice to get the naming convention right: this is the start logger, this is the end logger. Is that what the industry uses? We use the JSON Logger — it has some extra beneficial functionality. Otherwise organisations build their own custom logger and use it; it depends on the organisation and its integration architect. Like in Java, where you import JARs, here we import the logger and use it in our project.

What's the disadvantage of the plain Logger? For every logger, I have to add the transaction and correlation info each time, going to every logger and putting the information there. With the JSON Logger you make a connector configuration — like we did for HTTP Request — a global connector configuration, applicable to every logger in the whole project; that's where you select where the transaction or correlation ID comes from. [unclear]

It's like a custom connector: build it once, publish it and reuse it many times, instead of 100 steps every time. If an organisation doesn't use the JSON Logger, it's difficult to build custom loggers; such loggers are published to Exchange and imported from there, then available to drag and drop. Is it clear, everyone? Any doubts? Tell me once. Yes. Okay.

[screen: Start Logger message — %dw 2.0 · output application/json indent = false --- { "applicationName": app.name, "flowName": flow.name, "source": "front-end", "destination": "SFDC", "transactionId": vars.headers.'x-transaction-id', "memberId": vars.requestPayload.memberId, "startTime": vars.startTime, "tracePoint": "START", "message": "post members transactions flow started" } — from the reference project.]

We want to print these loggers as I did. What's "indent" after the output? Indent — indentation: the line-to-line gaps and alignment. With it there, what's the advantage? Proper formatting, line by line, organised. Look at our payload — is it with indentation? Yes — properly formatted line by line. Now I set indent = false. The default is true — indented. With indent = false, everything is on the same line, without line breaks [screen: Playground]. Advantage and disadvantage: indented has good visibility and readability; single-line doesn't. But which is better for transport? Lightweight — the single line. By default it's true.

Logger level: INFO, DEBUG, WARN, ERROR, TRACE [screen]. [unclear] The level only says which category the information is; the message is whatever we print. If set to DEBUG, it prints only when debug logging is enabled — not normally — so it doesn't occupy too much space. I don't want to confuse you with the functionality; understand the minimum for each and why we use it so much. We'll discuss separately. Leave it for now.

We've seen two things: the now function and indentation. Clear? Yes.

Application name — normally we'd hard-code it, and the flow name too. But I wrote app.name and flow.name. What does that mean? app.name is the application's name; flow.name is the name of the flow the logger is in. This logger is in our post resource flow, so that flow name is printed. If I put the same logger in another flow, it automatically takes that flow's name. Wherever it travels, it prints the flow it's in — so we get clarity on which flow the request passed through. Everyone clear?

Which is the start logger, middle logger, end logger — I decide here, with the tracePoint: START for the start logger, END for the end logger; in the middle, before the request — BEFORE_REQUEST, before the DB — BEFORE_DB; you can name them differently. I hard-coded the tracePoint. The message is a general message: whether this flow started, or it's here — a short general message. Formed like this, it looks good. Will all APIs follow it? No. Wouldn't it be good to adopt some of this?

So the logger has application name, flow name, source, destination, transaction ID, member ID. That was the reference application, with different systems, so its member ID and transaction ID mappings differ; let's change it to match our application. Message — before request, before DB, after DB [raw loops].

[unclear: discussion of checking logs in production — "recently in a production all the logs were …"; and an analogy to traffic rules.]

Logging is asynchronous in nature. [screen: log4j2.xml — RollingFile appender; AsyncRoot logger; HTTP wire logging at DEBUG; processor logger.] Say it takes 5 milliseconds to print the logger; with asynchronous logging, it takes only about 1 millisecond — or half — to get past the logger, so it saves about 4 to 4.5 milliseconds. Because it's asynchronous: it hands the information over and goes to the next component immediately. Do you understand? Yes.

Like printing: you send a 100-page PDF to the printer. Will it print all at once or page by page? One by one. But did I give the printer the information? Yes. If it's in the queue, will it work? Yes. Can I do my work now? Yes. I've handed it over and carry on — print it whenever; I don't mind. It doesn't impact the business response time. Everyone understood? Many people have confusion about this in real time. Yes, sir. Silence means everyone understood — please confirm; if not, I'll try my best to explain.

[Building our own logger message for the employees API:] Header names with hyphens: if you don't quote them, it won't read them properly; put the name in single quotes — vars.headers.'transaction-id' — and it reads it as one key. How is our transaction ID header named? Like this ["transaction-id"]; generally some use a capital I, "transactionId". Do we have a member ID? No — we have the employee ID: from the request payload, vars.requestPayload.empId. Start time; tracePoint START; destination "HR DB"; message "post employees flow started". That's enough for us. Click fx.

[screen: Before HR DB logger — "applicationName": app.name, "flowName": flow.name, "source": "front-end", "destination": "HR DB", "transactionId": vars.headers.'transaction-id', "employeeId": vars.requestPayload.empId, "startDBTime": now(), "tracePoint": "BEFORE_DB", "message": "post employees implementation flow started".]

This logger prints here; we gave INFO — the default. All the logger details print. Clear? Here's the end logger: copy this, click fx. What changes? Application name, flow name, source, destination, transaction ID, employee ID — all okay. Start time → end time. Before request → before DB: here it's startDBTime, so for after-DB change it to endDBTime. If we print now() in both, we can see the difference. If we want "total time taken for DB", it's now minus the start; we're printing in the logger, so we can calculate it here — right, light, no problem; [or] create a variable for it. Here it prints the start time; there, the end time; the difference tells us how long the DB took. After DB. It logs too much — we'll remove what's extra. Is this enough overall? Yes.

Sensitive information in loggers. What's sensitive information? Aadhaar numbers, PAN numbers, mobile numbers — or here, the employee salary. Many people print the whole payload. What's the payload here? The same as the original request — no overwrite in between: first the Transform Message creating initial variables, then the APIkit Router, the start logger, the Flow Reference, and here — the initial payload, the same. [unclear]

There's a function called masking. What's masking? Like an Aadhaar number showing only the last 4 digits. For example, a mobile number 8988776654 — 10 digits — I shouldn't print it like that. [unclear: "show password"] Is there sensitive information in this? Generally nothing — but it's better if the salary isn't visible. Say there are 100 API developers; if my salary doesn't match a teammate's, people get upset. [raw loops "I will get angry"]

PAN, Aadhaar and mobile numbers are considered sensitive — information that can be misused later. That's why every organisation decides what's sensitive; regulated sectors have rules — in banking, compulsorily credit card numbers, debit card numbers, email IDs, phone numbers etc. are sensitive. If such things are printed in loggers and an auditor checks — say a governing authority like the Reserve Bank of India comes for an audit — they'll ask to see your production logs. With thousands of APIs, if they ask to see whether sensitive information is in the logs, you have to show them; you can't deny them. If all 25 or 30 APIs' logs print everything in detail, they give a warning: it shouldn't be printed like this. And internally, if our employees misuse the information and the organisation gets a bad reputation, it's a problem for a publicly listed company. So masking is very important.

In this log we just built, is any sensitive information printed? No — I don't even have the salary, so how would it print? But do you know when it gets printed? Say I get this log, and it's a colleague's information — a new employee who's going to join; I interviewed him; he's created here. I immediately check the production log — and see his salary. Not approximately — the actual figure. That's a random example. Generally sensitive information should not be printed; it should be masked. DataWeave has a mask function: anything you want to mask, you can. We'll use the mask function — tomorrow.
