MuleSoft Telugu Course — Day 30 (cleaned transcript)
Source: transcripts/day30.txt (Whisper medium, Telugu → English). Cleaned by Claude: misheard technical terms corrected from context and from the class screens (slides/day30 in the notes repo), repetition loops removed, punctuation and paragraphs added. Nothing added that was not said. [unclear] marks parts that could not be recovered; [screen: …] marks text read from the video.

---

We can remove one variable with Remove Variable. To remove multiple variables, we do the same — one Remove Variable each. To remove a variable, you just give the variable's name. If we need to remove three variables, we keep three Remove Variables. Here there's no need, because the flow finishes anyway and everything is cleared. What I'm saying is: somewhere in the middle of the flows, if you feel a variable isn't needed any more and it's heavy — small variables are okay — but big variables, we can remove with the Remove Variable option. Clear to everyone? What does Remove Variable do? It deletes the variable, and the memory allocated for that variable is freed and can be used by other resources of your application. [screen: Remove Variable (Core) after the APIkit Router; setting: Name]

Shall we go to update? You can add the start logger, end logger and everything we discussed properly — I'm not going to do all of it, given the time; I'll discuss other things. In the implementation it's the same: before-DB logger and after-DB logger.

[screen: reference sys-app Insert — insert into EMPLOYEES_INFO values (:emp_id,:emp_name,:emp_status,:emp_salary,:emp_designation)]

One small thing about the insert. Can we write the query directly, without input parameters, with the values written in? Yes, no problem. Instead of payload.empId or payload.empName, you can put a hard-coded string or number directly. For example, say all the employees we insert are active — we never create an inactive employee. Only on update can an employee change from active to inactive; when creating, every employee is active. Look at the employee status in this order — that's the requirement. Can I hard-code the third value here? Yes — say "active" in quotes. Any employee that comes, the employee ID is mapped, and status is hard-coded. I can hard-code values directly here, and also keep the mapping. So why do I write the mapping separately? For neat, clean code. These are all column names; these are the mappings for the column names. If you change anything, it stays neat. Otherwise in a big query it gets clumsy. Since it's SQL code, it needs to be neat and presentable, so we follow this.

Before PATCH, one more thing I forgot. This is the general response in real time. What did I send? Status code 201, message "employee details created successfully in the db", the transaction ID we received — because it should be clear — and the employee ID. [screen: { statusCode: 201, message: "employee details created successfully in the db", transactionId: vars.origAttributes.headers.'transaction-id', employyeId: vars.origPayload.empId }] Did you see the response change? If I change the response structure, can we just do it? We can, no problem. But does this response match the RAML? It doesn't — there are extra fields. It's always good practice to implement it in the RAML too, even if nothing breaks.

In an organization, APIs are permanent, but people change — today one employee leaves, another joins. What will the new person check first? The RAML. The RAML says the response structure is like this; the implementation is different. They get confused. If another team member asks for the response structure, they check the RAML and give that example — and if it's a third party, it looks like we conveyed it wrongly. So it's always good practice to keep it consistent everywhere.

Why did I put extra fields here? Which request created it — the transaction ID; which employee — the employee ID. That's useful for the source that sent us the request.

So always do it in Design Center: change the API specification, publish, and update it in Studio. If it's urgent, change it in Studio first and update Design Center afterwards. Another option: in src/main/resources there's the api folder — if you import the RAML files into it, they're editable; imported as a dependency, they're not editable. So we go to Design Center, to the API. Where's the response structure? Can you help me — where should I change it?

In examples → responses → post response example: do we have transactionId and employeeId as we want? No, it's different, so we change it. Employee ID — the same as in Studio. Now let's see if it's sufficient. See the errors: "should have required property employeeId", "should have required property message", "statusCode", "transactionId". We've added them in the example. But we also have to add them in the data type — postResponseDataType. Did we add them? Yes: type object, properties statusCode, message, transactionId, employeeId. Still errors. Did you see? What's the issue? I copied and pasted it — are there double quotes? Check the keys. Yes — that's the issue. [screen: Syntax error : Expecting '"' but 'statusCode' found] In DataWeave it's detected automatically, but JSON needs the keys in double quotes. Let's format it and save. Any issues now? Everything is solved. Only the data type and example changed; nothing in the main file.

Since it changed, I have to publish. What's the version? 1.0.1 — the first was 1.0.0. [screen: Publishing to Exchange — asset version 1.0.1, API version v1, Stable] When I publish, does Studio update? No — we have to select it: right-click → Manage modules / dependencies, or the shortcut above. Right-click: there are the API specs; select it, update version from 1.0.0. If that doesn't work, can I change it to 1.0.1 in pom.xml? Yes. I go to pom.xml — the dependency, version 1.0.0.

— Sir, when we scaffold again, won't it overwrite all our changes?

No. Only a new resource gets an empty private flow generated in the same file. All the old resources already have flows; they stay the same. Since there are already implementations based on flow references, the old flows remain. In real time, once a resource is decided, there's no need to change it — even if it happens, in the development phase it does what I said.

Apply and close. Sometimes this option doesn't come. Then go to the pom and change it directly. Check the pom: 1.0.1. Have the latest changes come? 1.0.1 — fine. [screen: <artifactId>hr-employees-sapi-7303</artifactId> <version>1.0.1</version> <classifier>raml</classifier> <type>zip</type>] If refresh doesn't work, change it in the pom — this is the way.

Next, PATCH. The query is ready; copy and paste it. [screen: UPDATE EMPLOYEES_INFO SET emp_salary = :emp_salary, emp_designation = :emp_designation WHERE emp_id= :emp_id;] Update EMPLOYEES_INFO set salary, designation, where employee ID. Is it correct? Yes. Next the input parameters: where does salary come from? The payload. Designation? The payload. Employee ID also from the payload.

The main thing: the left side must match these — I match them with the table columns; indirectly these are table columns. The right side is the values we map. Many developers get confused about which goes left and which goes right. Be clear: on the left are the keys we send to the other system; on the right we map values from our payload or variables. Clear to everyone?

We click fx and give it. [unclear: connection issue]

Here we update only salary and designation. In this payload I could also change the employee name, last name and so on, if there are different transactions. Say complexity increases — a random requirement: the employee ID mandatory, and first name, last name, phone number, all these can change, not only salary and designation. Then we build the update for that. It's up to us to increase complexity according to the requirement. To keep it easy to understand, I only did designation and salary — a promotion.

In one operation you can write only one query — generally it's always one. I've never tried it, but to execute multiple queries there's Execute Script — we can run multiple queries — or a stored procedure with multiple queries.

Is it ready? Let's check the records: SELECT * FROM EMPLOYEES_INFO — three records. Let's update 1000: salary 1 lakh, from software engineer to senior software engineer. It failed. Why? "RAML not found" resource. Where? Most probably the router configuration — the APIkit Router config gets the 1.0.0 version automatically. This is the sys app — close it. Which application was deployed? 7303. The issue came from global config, the router configuration. You checked the router configuration and edited it — see the API definition: resource, then an organization ID, the API name… [screen: resource::9756392d-…:hr-employees-sapi-7303:1.0.0:raml:zip:hr-employees-sapi-7303.raml] Did you see? It searches for 1.0.0. We updated it to 1.0.1, right? Then change it here too. Sometimes it's just the API name directly — then there's no problem — but when it's mapped like this, there's an issue, and you have to change it here as well. Save, and it builds. So be careful.

I duplicate the request — PATCH. I want only the body: employee 1000, salary 1 lakh, designation senior software engineer — a promotion. Breakpoint here; trigger; resume. The request came. What's in the payload? affectedRows: 1 — one row affected. We could send the transaction ID and employee ID here too, as in POST — I've already shown it; you take care of it. [screen: 200 "employee details updated successfully in the db"]

Now, what if the employee doesn't exist? affectedRows 0 — no error, but nothing was updated. We use the Validation module. It validates details: if you get an IP, whether it's a proper IP; a URL; an email; an empty array or empty string — all these can be checked. Lots of operations. Which one can we use here? Is number — it checks whether it's a number. It's a single number — 0 or 1. We could say value greater than zero, or not equal to zero. Look what we did: if it's a number with minimum value 1 and maximum value 1, it's true and goes to the next step. If the condition doesn't match, it throws an error. Which error message? We define it: "No data updated for the employee passed in the request", or "No employee available with this employee ID". [screen: Is number — Value #[payload.affectedRows], Min 1, Max 1, Number type INTEGER; message "Employee doesn't exist in HR database"] The status code is done in the error handler at the end.

Do you remember the error type in the error handler? NO_DATA_FOUND.

Other than error-related components, where else can errors be mapped? Validation. In the Validation module, say you check an email — if it isn't an email, it raises an error. Which error type should it raise? It can be mapped here. Error mapping exists for every component that raises errors — not for Logger. It's available for the Database connector, HTTP Request connector, etc., but it's very rarely used there; error mapping is mostly used with this Validation module. In certification they ask: a component gives a connectivity error — say database connectivity — but with error mapping it's mapped to a different type. Then which error type will there be? The mapped one, not the original — because we tell it to map the error to the right side. Then the error handler checks where it should go: it should go to the mapped error type. Clear to everyone? — Clear.

What I'm saying is: this is the error type. If I don't do error mapping, this type of error comes automatically; if a handler for it exists, it goes there, otherwise to ANY. But I don't want this type; I want a customized type. So I map it — as soon as this error comes from this component, I change its error type. That's it. It's enough if the syntax is followed: like HTTP:CONNECTIVITY and DB:CONNECTIVITY, the same structure.

In Is number: payload.affectedRows. Let's go to our 7303 project and stop this. fx payload — I'm writing it from memory, it won't auto-complete since it already ran. Should I click fx for min and max? No need — I'm hard-coding them, not writing expressions. Number type: integer.

Is minimum 18 and maximum 65 sufficient for an age check? Test it: does 18 pass? Does 65 pass? If 18 doesn't pass, you'd have to put 17. Check the boundaries properly — that's what POCs are for; if in doubt, clarify.

The error: invalid number. I want a custom error type instead of VALIDATION:INVALID_NUMBER, so I map it. Copy this. Where did the error go? There's no matching handler. Let's stop and go to the XML — remember we commented this handler out; uncomment it (Ctrl+Shift+/). Here it's DATABASE:NO_DATA_FOUND — you could give DATABASE: or DB:, either way. I decided: the database doesn't have data — DATABASE colon NO_DATA_FOUND. What's the structure? A value on the left of the colon, a value on the right, with a meaningful name. That's the structure.

Now if we deploy, will it succeed or fail? It will fail, because we haven't mapped it yet — this error type doesn't appear anywhere in the application, so the error handler says there's no such error type.

What's the namespace? The left side — DATABASE. The right side is the identifier. It's a database-related error, so classifying it like this is easy for us. We tell this error to map to this one — "Mapping to custom error". In VALIDATION:INVALID_NUMBER, which is the namespace and which the identifier? VALIDATION is the namespace, INVALID_NUMBER the identifier. Here DATABASE is the namespace, NO_DATA_FOUND the identifier. [screen: Error Mapping — VALIDATION:INVALID_NUMBER → DATABASE:NO_DATA_FOUND] Now when this error comes, it's mapped. The error message stays the same as we gave it.

That's where your role comes into the picture. Alternatively: a Choice — if payload.affectedRows == 0, raise the error; otherwise go on. That works too; nothing wrong with it. You can do either.

Fine, it's applied. I hit it. Did you see? It deployed successfully, since there's now a matching error type. Look at the error type — it changed to the type we gave — and "Employee doesn't exist in HR database". [screen: errorType VALIDATION:INVALID_NUMBER in the debugger; Postman 500 "Employee doesn't exist in HR database"] Since there's no error handling in this flow, it went to the parent flow; the parent has an error handler, it checks for a matching error type — otherwise ANY — and it matched. Look: I'm setting the status, and the error description is what we gave — error.description. In the debugger too, the description is ours. I put 500 here randomly — I haven't evaluated it. When this comes up, discuss it in the team and finalize the status code. Clear to everyone? Any doubts? No.

Explore the Validation module too, very neatly: is null, is number, is string, is empty string, is blank string — many of them. "Collection" means array; "is empty collection" means an empty array came. Try all these. [unclear: long repetition about is true / is false]

We can also use Is false: payload.affectedRows == 0 — if it's false, it succeeds. With Is true: payload.affectedRows != 0. Do you understand? There'll be some confusion about when to use Is true, Is false or Is number. There are also is not number, is not null and so on. [unclear: repetition loop]

Next, GET. We get the employee ID — from where? Attributes — the URI params — and map it. Why am I copying this from the reference project? Because I'm lazy! In real time it's easier to copy than to write. And it's clearer when I show it first and then do it. [screen: select * from EMPLOYEES_INFO where emp_id=:emp_id; input parameter emp_id: attributes.uriParams.empid]

I go to our application. Since both are the same, we change the names. Implementation → get flow. Select the database configuration. We have the query. Should we use attributes or the variable we already created? Remember the initial variables: we can use vars.uriParams.empid or attributes.uriParams.empid — either. Since attributes.uriParams is already here, we'll use it. Ready.

Where will the response be? What comes back from the select goes into the payload. Do we have to map it? Yes. In which format does the response come from the database? Java. And how? As an array of objects. In general, can a select query return multiple rows? Here, with the employee ID condition, only one row. But normally, yes. When multiple rows come, how is the data represented? Each row as an object. For example, SELECT * FROM EMPLOYEES_INFO WHERE emp_status = 'active' — three rows come. The Database Select connector treats each row as an object and gives an array of objects. Understood? Compare the POST body: in JSON, an array of employees means multiple employees — the array, commas, three employees: 1000, 1001, 1002. Is it an array? Yes. Is each an object? Yes. An array of objects, each object one employee. From select we get one employee's details, another's, another's; converted to JSON it looks like this. With emp_id = a number, it comes the same way — just one object. Clear, or any confusion? — Understood.

Now, how do we do the mapping when it's an array of objects? I'll remove this. payload.empId? How did it come? In an array — so the index: zero. payload[0]. It comes in Java format; the Transform Message converts it to JSON — see "output application/json" on top. payload[0] reads from the Java; the conversion is done at the end. Did I give double quotes to the keys? No — converting to JSON is the Transform Message's responsibility. All of this is managed properly — not our headache.

Active: what comes from the system — active or inactive? We have to say: if payload[0].emp_status == "active" then true else false. [screen: Playground — active: if(payload[0].emp_status=="active") true else false]

Now if there are no employee details in the database for that number, what should I do? You should not send an error response. You should send a success response: "employee details not found in the database". We can use a Choice: if there's data, send it; otherwise send "employee details not found in the database". Then it comes as 200 OK. I've written this in the Choice, with another Transform Message here.

What should the condition be? Payload is not empty. Should we use sizeOf(payload) or isEmpty? That's the question. The problem with sizeOf is when the payload is very large — say an array of 100 objects. It loads all the data, counts the size, then decides. isEmpty or not empty just checks whether data is there or not. Performance-wise, which is better? isEmpty is better. In this situation it doesn't matter, but with huge data, sizeOf loads it in memory, counts 100, and then decides; isEmpty first checks if data is there — done. That's the performance difference. Clear to everyone? — Yes, sir.

I don't remember the syntax… Is this correct now? It's wrong, sir. What should we do? Not — this is enough. This exclamation mark in front: when it's empty, isEmpty(payload) is true; we're telling it to take the opposite condition. That's all. [screen: When #[!isEmpty(payload)] → Get Employee Final Response; Default → Transform Message] Here I give a simple message. If the condition is true it goes here; otherwise there.

Since it's already running, port 6666 isn't available — stop it, then debug. If we know the debugger navigation, 50-60% of the work is done.

We have to prepare the GET request. Duplicate the GET: localhost:8081/api/employees/1000. Is there employee 1000 in the database? Yes. I hit the request. Where is it? It didn't come — HTTP, localhost 8081, employees, 1000 — "No listener found" — it should be /api. Okay, the request came. I resume; there's a breakpoint. Look: size 1. What's the media type? Java. Index 0 has the employee details — salary, status, name, designation. In Java format it's a hash map. Did you get the idea of how the fields look when they come from the database?

The response I send should look like this; the response from the database looks like this. Which is the left side and which the right? On the left I keep what I send from the API — as per my consumer's request. On the right I map the response from the database. What did I do before? I used the same names on both sides directly, so I got a problem. [screen: 200 with every field null except active] Evaluate the expression in the debugger with payload[0].emp_id … — the values come. Ctrl+C, Ctrl+V, Ctrl+S. Resume. Now if I hit it — I got the response properly. [screen: {"empId": 1000, "empName": "Suresh", "empSalary": 100000.0, "active": true, "empDesignation": "senior software engineer"}]

One more test: an employee that doesn't exist. Payload size 0. Did it match? No, so it came to the default. Why did it come back like this? It's in Java format — we have to transform it to JSON. I forgot that. Add output application/json and save. [screen: 200 {"message": "employee details not found in the database"}] That's it implementation-wise. Any questions?

— Can I share my screen?

Yeah, share. [screen: BUILD FAILURE — common-error-handling.xml:8: Global element 'error-handler' does not provide a name attribute] Error handler — copy the name from the one at the top, give it a name, and check it matches correctly.

Any other doubts? If not, we'll connect tomorrow. Thanks, everyone.
